# dengue_COVID-19

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This study details a framework to estimate the delayed and nonlinear impact of Government interventions on dengue risk during the COVID-19 pandemic. The approach builds upon previous studies to model the impact of climate and interventions in Southeast Asia and Latin America by coupling distributed lag nonlinear models (DLNM) ([Gasparrini *et al.*, 2013](https://doi.org/10.1002/sim.3940)) with space-time Bayesian hierarchical models ([Lowe *et al.*, 2014](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(14)70781-9), [Lowe *et al.*, 2018](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002613)) fitted using integrated nested Laplace approximations in `R` (R-INLA) ([Lindgren *et al.*, 2015](https://www.jstatsoft.org/article/view/v063i19)). The modelling approach simultaneously describes space-varying, non-linear, and delayed associations between dengue incidence rates and NPIs variables. These exposure-lag-response associations can reveal how government interventions might impact dengue risk in the months. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A description of each file and folder is provided below:

  **01-historic.R:** `R` script to load and process data needed to run DLNMs in INLA "historical" models to predict the number of cases in 2020. 

  **02-random_effect.R:** `R` script to explore and visualize the role of random effects in history model.
  
  **03-load_data.R:** `R` script to load packages and data, preprocessing PHSM and HMB datasets

  **04-dlnm_uni.R:** `R` script to run DLNM univariate intervention models.
   
  **05-cluster.R:** `R` script to cluster and test PHSM and HMB datasets.
    
  **06-dlnm_var_selection.R:** `R` script to stepwise regression filters and run DLNM multivariate NPIs and Human mobility model.

  **07-plot_association_mul.R:** `R` script to explore and visualise exposure-overall-response associations in "intervention" models.

  **08-plot_contour_mul.R:** `R` script to explore and visualise exposure-lag-response associations in "intervention" models.

  **09-rr_pf.R:** `R` script to calculate relative risk and protective fraction.
 
  **00.data:** a folder containing the database, data description, and a grid file for `facet_geo()` plots (in .csv format), and shapefiles (.shp, .shx, .dbf, .prj). 
  
  **01.output:** a folder to save the model outputs. This also contains subfolders named **3.preds_test**, with the R script used to generate the cross-validation exercise and associated output files. 

  **02.fig:** a folder to save the figures generated by the `R` scripts.
  
  **Dengue_COVID-19.Rproj:** An `RStudio` project file, to avoid having to set your working directory to the dengue_npis folder on your computer. 

Download the repository as a ZIP file using the green button *Clone or download* above, then open the .Rproj file in `RStudio` to begin. 

The analysis was performed using R version 4.0.5 (2021-03-31).
